Princess Diana by Anne Collins, published by Macmillan Education, a division of Macmillan
Publishers Limited, 2009.
Introduction Princess Diana was a very famous British woman. In August 1997 Diana was
on holiday in the Mediterranean with her new man Dodie Al-Fayed. There were holiday
photographs of them in the newspapers. Diana looked happy. Then just a few days
later she was dead. She died suddenly on the 31st of August in a car accident in
Paris. There are many books about Diana's life. We often see her photograph and hear
her name. She was beautiful and famous. She was a modern princess and a loving mother.
She wanted to help people. But her life was not always happy. This is Diana's story.
Chapter 1 The Early Years
Diana's parents were Francis and Johnny Spencer, the Viscount Althorp. Johnny was from a very
old and important English family, the Spencer family. George Washington, Humphrey Bogart,
and Rudolf Valentino were connected to this family. Francis was beautiful but she was
also a very strong woman. She fell in love with Johnny Althorp when she was only 17 years
old. Johnny Althorp was tall and handsome and Francis wanted to marry him. Johnny went
to Eton, one of the most famous private schools in England. And then he was an officer in
the army. Later he left the army and studied farming. Francis and Johnny married on the
1st of June 1954 at St. Margaret's Church, Westminster, in London. A thousand people
were at the wedding. The Queen, the Duke of Edinburgh, the Queen Mother, and the Queen's
sister, Princess Margaret, all came. Francis and Johnny lived at Park House in Norfolk.
The royal family had a house nearby called Sandringham House. The royals often came to
Sandringham on holiday. They knew the Spencer family well. When Francis' father died, he
left her a lot of money. Francis used the money to buy a farm at Snettisham near Park House.
In 1955, the couple had a daughter, Sarah, and in 1957, another daughter, Jane. In 1960,
they had another child. This time it was a boy called John, but he died after only 10 hours.
Then, on the 1st of July 1961, Diana was born. And three years later, in May 1964, Francis and
Johnny had a boy, Charles. But there were problems in the marriage. In 1966, Francis met a new man,
Peter Shand Kidd, at a party in London. Francis and Peter fell in love. At Christmas, 1967,
Francis left Johnny and moved to London. She wanted to take the children with her. Johnny wanted
them to stay at Park House with him. Diana missed her mother very much. She was only six years
old when Francis left. Her sisters were at boarding school, a type of school where they lived most
of the time. It was a sad and very difficult time for Diana and Charles. After Francis left,
Johnny paid money to different women, called nannies, to look after the children at Park House.
The Spencer children loved Park House. It was a large and friendly house. Diana loved animals
like dogs, cats, and rabbits. She enjoyed swimming, playing tennis, and going for picnics on the beach.
She visited her mother in London at the weekends. Sometimes the royal family invited the Spencer
children to the big house at Sandringham. Diana was good friends with Prince Charles's younger
brother, Prince Andrew. Diana's mother and father divorced in April 1969. Francis married Peter
Shand Kidd soon after. Diana and her brother had holidays with Peter and his three children.
Later, Francis and Peter bought a big house on the Isle of Seil. Seil was an island near the west
coast of Scotland. Diana went to a small day school near her home, called Silfield.
But when she was nine, her father sent her to boarding school. The school was called Riddlesworth
Hall. In September 1973, when Diana was 12, she moved to another school called West Heath.
West Heath was near the town of Seven Oaks in Kent. Diana liked her new school. She had some good
friends there. She learned to dance and play the piano. She was not very interested in school
exams, but she was good at dancing and swimming. At this time, Johnny Althorpe met a new woman.
Her name was Rain Leg, the Countess of Dartmouth. Rain was also the writer Barbara Cartland's daughter.
Rain was married with four children. Johnny's children loved their father very much,
and they did not want him to be with another woman. Then, on the 9th of June 1975,
Johnny's father Jack died. Jack was the seventh Earl Spencer. Now Johnny became the eighth Earl
Spencer, and Diana became Lady Diana Spencer. Johnny and his family went to live in his father's
great house at Althorpe in Northampton. The Spencer children did not like Althorpe very much.
It was a very big house in a large park. It had 121 rooms. It was a beautiful house,
but it was also very cold. It was not a home-like park house.
Rain started to come to Althorpe a lot. In May 1976, Rain and her husband divorced.
Two months later in July, Johnny and Rain married quietly in London.
Johnny did not tell his children about the wedding. They read about it in the newspapers.
The Spencer children were very angry with their father. Now Rain lived at Althorpe all the time.
Diana loved her father, but he was now married to Rain. This was very difficult for Diana.
Many of Rain and Johnny's friends visited Althorpe. They had a lot of parties there.
But the Spencer girls were always cold to Rain.
In 1978, Johnny was very ill and was close to death. Rain looked after him and helped save his life.
Johnny was lucky, and he got better. But still the children did not like Rain.
Chapter 2 The Prince
Prince Charles was born on the 14th of November 1948 at Buckingham Palace.
He is the oldest of the Queen's four children. He is also the Prince of Wales.
After the King or Queen dies, the Prince of Wales usually becomes King. So Charles is heir to the
throne or the next King. When he was a boy, Charles was very shy.
He went first to a day school in London. Later, his parents sent him to Gordonston,
a boarding school in North East Scotland. Life for Charles at Gordonston was very hard.
Charles was sad there and did not have any friends. He did not see his parents very often.
Later, Charles went to Cambridge University. Then he was an officer in the Royal Navy,
the part of the armed forces that works at sea. He was in the Navy for five years. He was a pilot
and flew planes and helicopters. Charles enjoyed horse riding and loved playing polo,
a game for people riding on horses. He also liked hunting and shooting animals,
for example birds and deer with a gun. When Charles was 23, in the summer of 1970,
he met Camilla Shand at a polo match. Camilla was 15 months older than Charles. Camilla was pretty
and fun. She liked the same things as Charles. She loved horses, dogs,
the countryside and hunting. Charles and Camilla spent weekends together at the home of Earl Mount
Baton. Earl Mount Baton was Charles's father's uncle. Charles was very close to Earl Mount
Baton. He called the Earl Grandpa. But Camilla married another young man called Andrew Parker
Bowles in July 1973. After that, Charles had many girlfriends. The newspapers started calling him
the Playboy Prince. Charles liked tall, blonde women. Some of his girlfriends were Divina Sheffield,
Anna Wallace and Mount Baton's granddaughter, Amanda Nachpal. Charles also had friends who
were married women. One of these was an Australian woman called Dale Trion. Her friends called her
kanga, like the Australian animal kangaroo. But the most important woman friend for Charles
was still Camilla Parker Bowles. Camilla and Andrew Parker Bowles were now married with two
children. Andrew Parker Bowles knew about his wife's friendship with Prince Charles,
but he was not unhappy about it. In fact, Andrew and Prince Charles were friends.
Then something exciting happened. Sarah Spencer, Diana's older sister, met Prince Charles at a
party at Windsor Castle in the summer of 1977. She went to watch the Prince playing polo.
Later they went on a skiing holiday together. The queen invited Sarah to Balmoral, the royal
family's Scottish home. That November, Sarah invited Prince Charles to all thought for the weekend.
Diana was there too. She first met Prince Charles in the countryside near her home.
She was just 16 years old. In April 1978, Diana's sister Jane got married.
Her husband was Robert Fellows, the son of a Norfolk family. Later Robert Fellows had a very
important job. He was private secretary to the queen, helping her and working very closely with her.
Sarah's romance with Prince Charles ended. On the 14th of November 1978, the prince had a dance
for his 30th birthday at Buckingham Palace. He invited Sarah, but he invited Diana too.
Diana was very surprised and excited. She liked Prince Charles very much.
Mountbatten wanted Charles to marry and have children. Charles usually listened to Mountbatten,
but he did not want to get married. He did not need a wife. He liked painting pictures
and he liked reading books. He had his girlfriends. He also had servants or people who worked for him
to do things for him. Then in 1979, the IRA, Irish Republican army, killed Earl Mountbatten
with a bomb in his fishing boat. Mountbatten was dead and Charles was shocked and very sad.
I have lost someone very special in my life, he said.
Chapter 3 The fairy story begins. Diana was now a young woman of 17.
She wanted to go and live in London. Both her sisters Sarah and Jane lived there. They worked
for Vogue magazine. But Diana was not interested in a job that paid lots of money. She loved
children and was very good with them. So she went to London and found jobs looking after children.
Diana was very happy with her new life. Her mother, Francis, had a flat in Cadogan Square,
a very wealthy part of London. Diana lived in the flat with two girlfriends.
In July 1979, her mother bought her a flat in London for her 18th birthday.
The address was 60 Colhern Court, Chelsea. Diana lived there with three friends.
Caroline Pride, or Caroline Bartholomew after she was married. Anne Bolton and Virginia Pitman.
Diana enjoyed London. She did not like parties, but sometimes she went to dances at country houses.
But she liked sitting at home and watching television with her girlfriends.
In May 1980, Diana's sister Sarah married Neil McCorkardale, an officer in the army.
The married couple lived in Chelsea too, near Diana. Diana often went to Sarah's house.
Sometimes Sarah paid Diana to clean her house for her.
Diana was now 19 years old. She was a happy, pretty young woman. Life was good for her.
Diana met Charles again in July 1980, at a house party in West Sussex.
He invited her to go with him on the Royal Yacht, a large boat called Britannia.
They were on the boat at cows in the Isle of Wight, an island off the south of England.
Later, in September, Prince Charles invited Diana to stay at Balmoral in Scotland.
He invited some other friends too, but they were all much older than Diana. Diana's sister Jane
and her husband Robert Fellows were there. Camilla and Andrew Parker Bowles were there too.
Charles started seeing Diana more and more.
The newspapers were very interested in Charles' romantic life.
Soon they knew all about his beautiful new girlfriend.
One story in the Sun newspaper said,
He's in love again. Lady Di is the new girl for Charles.
The newspaper reporters, the people who write the stories for newspapers,
came to Diana's flat at 60 Col Hearn Court in London. They waited outside.
All the reporters wanted to take photographs of her. Diana was always nice to the reporters.
The reporters liked her and became her friends.
The newspapers started calling her, Shy Die.
On the 14th of November 1980, Charles was 32 years old.
The newspapers and Charles' family asked the same question.
Is Prince Charles going to marry Lady Diana?
In January 1981, Charles went on a skiing holiday to clusters in Switzerland.
When he was there, he telephoned Diana.
I've got something to ask you, he said.
Diana was very excited. She sat with her girlfriend's very late at night, talking about Prince Charles.
When Charles returned from his holiday, he asked Diana to marry him.
Diana said yes.
On the 24th of February 1981, Buckingham Palace told the country that Charles, Prince of Wales,
was going to marry Lady Diana Spencer.
Charles and Diana gave a television interview in the Garden of Buckingham Palace.
Can you find the right words to say how you feel today?
Asked the interviewer.
Difficult to find the right sort of words, said Charles, just delighted and happy.
And I suppose in love, asked the interviewer.
Of course, said Diana Shiley.
Whatever in love means, Charles answered.
Two nights later, Diana went to live at Buckingham Palace.
Most people in Britain were very happy about Charles and Diana.
People liked reading about Charles' girlfriends, but now it was time for him to marry.
Everyone was excited about the royal wedding.
Many people thought that Diana was the perfect wife for Charles.
She was a beautiful young girl, tall and blonde.
She was very sweet and shy, and, very importantly for the royal family,
Prince Charles was her first boyfriend.
Because of this, the newspapers could not write stories about Diana and other boyfriends.
Camilla was also happy about Diana.
Camilla was married and had a husband, Andrew Parker Bowles.
She could not be Charles' wife.
But Charles was going to be the next king.
He needed to have children, so he had to marry someone.
And Diana was a very sweet girl.
Diana found her new life at Buckingham Palace, lonely and a little difficult.
She had to meet lots of new people and learn new things.
Charles invited Diana to his friend's homes.
Often Camilla was there too.
Camilla often talked to Diana about Charles.
Diana was very surprised.
Why was Camilla all was there?
And how did she know so much about Charles?
Charles and Diana were married on the 29th of July, 1981.
It was a beautiful summer's day.
It was a perfect romantic wedding.
750 million people in more than 70 countries watched the wedding on television.
Lady Di was now Princess Di.
She was not a shy young girl now.
She was a princess.
Diana looked beautiful at her wedding.
She was in love with her husband and she was very happy.
She wore a wonderful, long dress of expensive silk.
Later, after the wedding, the new couple kissed outside Buckingham Palace.
People all around the world watched the kiss and were happy for Charles and Diana.
And thousands of people waited in the streets of London.
They wanted to see the royal couple.
After the wedding, Charles and Diana went to Broadlands,
Mountbatten's country home, for two days.
Then they went on honeymoon, the holiday after a wedding, on the Royal Yacht Britannia.
But it was not a very private honeymoon.
There were 200 sailors working on the ship too.
So Charles and Diana were not alone very much.
Charles liked reading books written by his friend, the South African writer, Laurent Vanderpost.
He brought some of Vanderpost's books with him on the honeymoon.
He sat on the boat reading them.
Diana was not interested in these books, so she talked to the sailors and cooks.
Later, in September of that year, Charles and Diana went on holiday to Balmoral in Scotland.
The Queen, the Duke of Edinburgh and the Queen Mother were there too.
Diana liked Scotland, but she did not like the same things as Charles and other people in his family.
She did not like hunting and shooting animals.
Diana did not feel part of the family.
In October, Charles and Diana went to Wales for their first public visit.
Newspaper and television reporters came from all over the world to take pictures of Diana.
They were very interested in the new Princess of Wales.
Diana did not feel well. She was pregnant with her first baby.
But she got out of the car and walked in the streets to meet people.
She knew how to talk to people.
She talked to children and old people.
And she talked in public for the first time.
She made this speech in Welsh, the national language of Wales.
Everyone loved Diana.
They shouted, we want die, we want die, we want die.
The people were more interested in Diana than in her husband, Prince Charles.
On the 21st of June 1982, Diana and Charles's first son, Prince William was born.
Prince Charles was with Diana at the hospital all day.
When William was born, Charles was very happy.
It was only 11 months after the royal wedding.
Diana was not a young, shy girl living in a flat with friends now.
She was a royal wife and she was mother of the future king.
It was a big change in Diana's life.
Everybody was very excited about the baby prince.
Diana and Charles arrived home from the hospital and the crowds of people waved and shouted.
It was a happy time for the princess.
The New Year
Chapter 4
We Want Die
Charles and Diana had a new London home.
This home was an apartment or flat in Kensington Palace.
Some other members of the royal family had apartments in Kensington Palace, too.
The Queen's sister, Princess Margaret, lived there. Princess Margaret had a party for Charles
and Diana and the baby. Charles also had a house in Gloucestershire,
in the west of England. This house was called High Grove. It was near the home of Camilla
and Andrew Parker Bowles. Charles and Camilla often went hunting together
in the countryside near High Grove. After Prince William was born, Diana became ill.
She began to have problems with eating. She had an illness called bulimia nervosa. She
often ate a lot of food, then made herself sick. Charles was worried about his wife,
and he did not understand her problems. Diana started to look unwell. She became very
thin. Some newspaper reporters began to ask questions about her health. Diana read these
stories in the newspapers, and she became very unhappy. In March 1983, Charles and Diana
went to visit different places in Australia. They took the baby, Prince William, with them.
This tour of Australia was very successful. It was the beginning of Diamania. Everybody
was crazy about Diana. Everybody loved her and wanted to see her. Hundreds of photographers
came from countries all over the world. They all wanted photos of Diana for their newspapers.
Charles and Diana visited many of Australia's cities. Almost one million people came to
see them. In each city, Charles and Diana did a walkabout. They walked in the crowded
city streets and talked to the people. But the people wanted to see Diana more than Charles.
We want die, they shouted. Later that year, Charles and Diana went on a tour of Canada.
This tour was also a big success. But again, the people's favourite was Diana, not Charles.
This was very difficult for Charles. Diana was very good at talking to people. She talked
to people of all ages, old and young. She talked to sick people too. When she smiled
at people, they felt happy. A newspaper in America wrote,
Diamania is the most popular woman in the world. The French magazine, Paris Match, wrote,
Diana is more popular than the actress Bridget Bardot. Charles and Diana went on holiday
in April 1983 to the Bahamas. The photographers took pictures of them on a beach. Charles
and Diana walked hand in hand. They looked happy and in love.
Diana became pregnant again. On the 15th of September 1984, the baby was born. It was
another boy. His name was Prince Henry Charles Albert David. Everyone called him Prince
Harry. Now William had a brother. Soon after Harry was born, Diana started to work for
charities, groups which help people in need. She became president of Bernardo's, the Children's
Charity. She visited Bernardo's children's homes all over the UK, United Kingdom and
talk to people there. Some people in Bernardo's had very sad lives. They felt better when they
talked to Diana about their problems. And Diana was good at listening to their stories.
The newspapers loved writing about Diana's clothes and hair. When the Queen opened Parliament
one year, the newspapers were not very interested. Diana's clothes were more important.
In 1985, Charles and Diana went on tours to Italy, Australia and the USA, the United States of America.
In America, Charles and Diana visited President Reagan and his wife Nancy. President Reagan gave
a big dance for the couple. Diana wore a beautiful black dress and danced with the famous actor
John Travolta. She looked very happy. Diana was no longer shy die. She was beautiful and she could
dress well. She had a wonderful smile. But she also cared about people. She talked to them and made
them happy. Everyone loved her. But at this time, some reporters started writing about problems in
Charles and Diana's marriage. They said that there were big differences between Charles and Diana.
Diana is a very young 24. Charles is a very old 36. wrote one newspaper.
Chapter 5 The problems begin. Diana was the wife of Prince Charles and the mother of Prince's
William and Harry. She was a very important person. So a policeman had to go everywhere with her.
This policeman's job was to protect Diana and look after her. When Diana walked in the park,
the policeman went with her. When she went shopping or out in the evenings, he went to.
The princess became very close to one policeman, Barry Manikey. When she took William and Harry out,
Manikey went to. The newspapers showed many photographs of Diana with her sons and Barry Manikey.
Some people began to think, Princess Diana is in love with Barry Manikey. This was not good for
Prince Charles or the royal family. So Manikey lost his job of looking after the princess.
Two years later, Manikey died in a motorbike accident. Another new person came into Diana's
life. This was Sarah Ferguson, usually called Fergie. Sarah was older than Diana. Her father,
Ronald Ferguson, was Prince Charles's polo manager, the person who trains the polo team.
Sarah and Diana first met at a polo match. Sarah lived in a flat in London with friends.
She had lots of red hair and loved having fun. Sarah and Diana started having lunch together
every week. Diana invited Fergie to dinner at Kensington Palace. There she met Prince
Charles' younger brother, Prince Andrew. Fergie and Andrew fell in love. They married on the 23rd
of July, 1986, in another big royal wedding. Diana and Fergie were friends, but Fergie was
very different from Diana. She loved outdoor life and sports. She was very good at riding
and she loved horses. She enjoyed going to Balmoral and doing things outdoors with the royal family.
Charles and Diana were very different kinds of people. Charles was not interested in the
same things as Diana. He could not understand her. He could not understand her problems with
bulimia or that she needed help. Charles started seeing many of his old friends again.
He spent a lot of time with Camilla Parker Bowles. Camilla understood Charles and made him feel good.
She was not difficult like Diana. Diana knew that Charles was spending time with Camilla.
She became angry and jealous. She felt that her husband did not love her anymore.
So she started to see a young army officer. His name was James Hewitt.
Diana and Hewitt met at a polo game. Hewitt was very good looking. He was kind
and could talk to women easily. He was good at listening too. Later they met again at Buckingham
Palace. Diana asked Hewitt to give her horse riding lessons.
Hewitt cared about Diana and made her feel good. Diana told Hewitt about her bulimia and he listened.
They spent weekends together at Hygrove. Sometimes they went to Hewitt's mother's house in Devon
in the south west of England. Sometimes Charles liked going to places by himself.
He wanted to be alone and think. In 1987 he went to the Kalahari Desert in Botswana with his friend
the writer Laurent Van de Poste. Then he went to a lonely island in Scotland.
People did not like this. Why isn't Charles with Diana? They asked.
In September the newspapers showed photos of Charles at Balmoral. But Diana was not with him.
She was in London with William and Harry.
Charles and Diana are not speaking said the newspapers. People began to ask questions about
the royal marriage. Were Charles and Diana not happy? Diana did more charity work.
She did a lot of work for the old people's charity, helped the aged and for people with
AIDS acquired immune deficiency syndrome. She worked hard and children and old people loved her.
Diana was not afraid of people with AIDS. One time she shook hands with an AIDS patient.
The next day there were photographs in all the newspapers. They called her caring die.
Two years later she visited the Harlem Hospital Centre in New York.
The photographers took a picture of Diana and a child with AIDS.
After that many people heard about the Harlem Hospital. They became interested in the children
with AIDS there. So Diana's visit was a very good thing for the hospital.
Now people were not just interested in Diana's clothes or hair. They were interested in her work
as well.
Chapter 6 Unhappy Times
In January 1988 Charles and Diana went on another visit to Australia.
Again everyone wanted to see Diana not Charles.
Diana sang Australia's national song but Charles did not know the words.
We love die shouted the people. Charles felt jealous of his wife. It was a difficult time for their marriage.
Diana's mother Frances Shand Kidd knew about Diana's problems in her marriage.
She tried to help her daughter. But in the summer of 1988 Frances's husband Peter Shand Kidd left her.
Frances was very sad. Diana invited her mother to Kensington Palace in London.
But Frances did not come. She did not want to leave her home in Scotland.
In November 1988 Charles and Diana went to Paris.
This visit was very successful. Diana looked beautiful and Charles made speeches in French.
Then on the 14th of November 1988 there was a big dance at Buckingham Palace for Charles's 40th
birthday. In the autumn of 1989 James Hewitt went to work in Germany. Diana did not want him to go.
At this time she met a new male friend James Gilby. Gilby's job was selling expensive cars.
Diana and James Gilby began to meet in London.
On New Year's Eve, the 31st of December 1989, someone recorded Diana and James Gilby talking on the telephone.
Gilby said, I love you. Diana did not know about the recording.
Fergie and Prince Andrew also had problems in their marriage. Andrew was often away for a long time with his job in the Navy.
Fergie went to Australia for six weeks. There she met a handsome American, Steve Wyatt.
James Hewitt returned to England and then went with the army to Iraq.
While he was in Iraq, Diana telephoned him. She sent him letters and expensive food.
In 1991, some newspaper reporters started writing about Diana and James Hewitt.
Diana did not want people to find out about her relationship with Hewitt.
When Hewitt came back from Iraq, she did not see him.
Diana was very sad and felt very alone.
What can I do? She thought.
She decided to tell the public about her life. She wanted people to know her story.
But she could not do this alone. So she asked a reporter, Andrew Morton, to help her.
She asked him to write a book about her life. She wanted him to talk to her friends.
But she did not tell anyone in the royal family about the book. It was a secret.
Many newspaper reporters liked Diana and felt sorry for her.
Sometimes Diana took William and Harry to amusement parks, large parks which have rides
and many different fun activities. She also took them on a skiing holiday to Austria.
But Charles did not go with them.
Where is Charles? Ask the newspapers. Diana is a loving mother, but Charles is a bad father.
In June 1991, William had an accident at his school. A golf ball hit him on the head.
Charles and Diana took William to the Great Ormond Street Hospital for sick children in London.
William needed an operation.
Diana stayed with William at the hospital all night. But Charles left.
What kind of father are you? Ask the newspapers the next day.
On the 1st of July 1991, Diana was 30 years old.
The 29th of July was Charles and Diana's 10th wedding anniversary. But their marriage was not a happy one.